Understanding hardware detection
---------------------------------
Intel/AMD manufactures chips.. The compatibility of the motherboard is determined by the CPU socket type and the 
associated chipset. . If the specified CPU socket type and chipset is supported then we can use the motherboard. These 
motherboards will have chipsets that are provided by intel or amd, that enable communication b/w CPU, RAM storage and 
other peripherals. Intel normally supports the same chipsets for two generations of CPU. 

When a system is powered on, a CPLD(Complex programmable logic device) will ensure appropriate voltage levels and power 
settings to each peripheral, and de-asserts the reset line of the CPU. The CPU starts fetching instructions from a location
known as the reset vector. The instruction is a jump to the BIOS/UEFI firmware code that is located 
on a non-volatile memory in the motherboard. 

The motherboard firmware will perform hardware detection and also contains information such as boot order, 
hardware configuration, system time etc. During the boot process, only the hardware modules strictly necessary to 
find and start the OS are loaded. These hardware modules are: motherboard, hard drive, RAM, graphics card, keyboard, mouse, 
screen (that is detected by the graphics card), network card, CD / DVD, and a few extra peripherals such as USB units.

Each hardware module you connect to a computer has a controller that is like a small firmware with all the information 
of the stored device: manufacturer, device type, protocols, etc.. for ex: Network cards, video cards, RAID controllers, 
hard drives, flash drives, SSDs, sound cards, just to name a few, can all have firmware embedded inside the device.

During boot the hardware detection process is very simple: the motherboard firmware has hardcoded all the information 
about the motherboard, with all communication ports. At startup, the firmware sends a signal to all system ports asking 
the questions "Who are you? What are you? How do you function?" and all.. attached devices answers by sending their information. 
In this way the computer knows how much RAM you have, if there is present a keyboard or a mouse, which storage devices are 
available, screen resolution, etc ...

Obviously, this process only works with the basic modules needed to boot the system, and does not work with complex 
peripherals that require specific drivers: printers, scanners, webcams ... all these complex peripherals are loaded by software 
once the OS has been loaded.

During the Boot-up of the system, recognizing all the PCI devices in the system is done and is known as the PCI Bus 
enumeration. firmware generally enumerates all the PCI devices present on all the buses and populates them to the sysfs. 
Users can access the details of PCI devices present with the help of the lspci utility After the PCI Bus enumeration, 
all the devices get the bus number, device number, and function number. These three components are enough to locate 
any device.

On any x86 based Linux platform, there is a root complex PCI driver or Linux PCI subsystem which reads the information 
populated by firmware/BIOS and exports the information to the sysfs filesystem. All the PCI devices present in the system 
can be found inside the /sys/bus/pci/devices directory. 
Root complex driver also provides the flexibility to rescan or reset the devices on any PCI Bus. Even full rescanning 
of all the PCI Buses can be done through /sys/bus/pci/rescan.


how does os detect hardware???
------------------------------
Generally speaking, most modern OSes (Windows and Linux) will re-scan the detected hardware as part of the boot 
sequence. Trusting the BIOS to detect everything and have it setup properly has proven to be unreliable.

In a typical x86 PC, there are a combination of techniques used to detect attached hardware.

PCI and PCI Express busses has a standard mechanism called Configuration Space that you can scan to get a list of 
attached devices. This includes devices installed in a PCI/PCIe slot, and also the controller(s) in the chipset (Video 
Controller, SATA, etc).

If an IDE or SATA controller is detected, the OS/BIOS must talk to the controller to get a list of attached drives.

If a USB controller is detected, the OS/BIOS loaded a USB protocol stack, and then enumerates the attached hubs and 
devices.

For "legacy" ISA devices, things are a little more complicated. Even if your motherboard does not have an ISA slot on 
it, you typically still have a number of "ISA" devices in the system (Serial Ports, Parallel Ports, etc). These devices 
typically lack a truly standardized auto-detection method. To detect these devices, there are 2 options:

Probe known addresses - Serial Ports are usually at 0x3F8, 0x2F8, 0x3E8, 0x2E8, so read from those addresses and see if 
there is something there that looks like a serial port UART. This is far from perfect. You may have a serial port at a 
non-standard address that are not scanned. You may also have a non-serial port device at one of those addresses that 
does not respond well to being probed. Remember how Windows 95 and 98 used to lock up a lot when detecting hardware 
during installation?

ISA Plug-n-Play - This standard was popular for a hot minute as ISA was phased out in favor of PCI. You probably will 
not encounter many devices that support this. I believe ISA PnP is disabled by default in Windows Vista and later, but 
I am struggling to find a source for that right now.

ACPI Enumeration - The OS can rely on the BIOS to describe these devices in ASL code. (See below.)

Additionally, there may be a number of non-PnP devices in the system at semi-fixed addresses, such as a TPM chip, HPET, 
or those "special" buttons on laptop keyboards. For these devices to be explained to the OS, the standard method is to 
use ACPI.

The BIOS ACPI tables should provide a list of on-motherboard devices to the OS. These tables are written in a language 
called ASL (or AML for the compiled form). At boot time, the OS reads in the ACPI tables and enumerates any described 
devices. Note that for this to work, the motherboard manufacturer must have written their ASL code correctly. This is 
not always the case.

And of course, if all of the auto-detection methods fail you, you may be forced to manually install a driver. You do 
this through the Add New Hardware Wizard in Windows. (The exact procedure varies depending on the Windows version you 
have installed.)


PCI-e details
-------
When the computer is powered on, the PCI bus(es) and device(s) must be enumerated by BIOS or operating system. Bus 
enumeration is performed by attempting to access the PCI configuration space registers for each buses, devices and 
functions. Note that device number, different from VID and DID, is merely a device's sequential number on that bus. 
Moreover, after a new bridge is detected, a new bus number is defined, and device enumeration restarts at device number 
zero.

If no response is received from the device's function #0, the bus master performs an abort and returns an all-bits-on 
value (FFFFFFFF in hexadecimal), which is an invalid VID/DID value, thus the BIOS or operating system can tell that the 
specified combination bus/device_number/function (B/D/F) is not present. So, when a read to a function ID of zero for a 
given bus/device causes the master (initiator) to abort, it must then be presumed that no working device exists on that 
bus because devices are required to implement function number zero. In this case, reads to the remaining functions 
numbers (1–7) are not necessary as they also will not exist.

When a read to a specified B/D/F combination for the vendor ID register succeeds, the system firmware or operating 
system knows that it exists; it writes all ones to its BARs and reads back the device's requested memory size in an 
encoded form. The design implies that all address space sizes are a power of two and are naturally aligned.[1]

At this point, the BIOS or operating system will program the memory-mapped addresses and I/O port addresses into the 
device's BAR configuration registers. These addresses stay valid as long as the system remains turned on. Upon 
power-off, these settings are lost and the procedure is repeated next time the system is powered back on. BIOS or 
operating system will also program some other registers of the PCI configuration space for each PCI device, e.g. 
interrupt request. Since this entire process is fully automated, the user is spared the task of configuring any newly 
added hardware manually by changing DIP switches on the cards themselves. This automatic device discovery and address 
space assignment is how plug and play is implemented.

If a PCI-to-PCI bridge is found, the system must assign the secondary PCI bus beyond the bridge a bus number other than 
zero, and then enumerate the devices on that secondary bus. If more PCI bridges are found, the discovery continues 
recursively until all possible domain/bus/device combinations are scanned.

Each non-bridge PCI device function can implement up to 6 BARs, each of which can respond to different addresses in I/O 
port and memory-mapped address space. Each BAR describes a region [2][1] that is between 16 bytes and 2 gigabytes in 
size, located below 4 gigabyte address space limit. If a platform supports the "Above 4G" option in system firmware, 64 
bit BARs can be used.

A PCI device may also have an option ROM.

Linux uses udevd for device detection and device file creation, by getting uevents when new device is detected. 

-------------------------------------------------

UEFI -- The Unified Extensible Firmware Interface is a publicly available specification that defines a software 
interface between an operating system and platform firmware. UEFI replaces the legacy Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) 
boot firmware originally present in all IBM PC-compatible personal computers,

Booting in x86 systems
-----------------------
The UEFI-based platform reads the partition table on the system storage and mounts the EFI System Partition (ESP), a 
VFAT partition labeled with a particular globally unique identifier (GUID) - C12A7328-F81F-11D2-BA4B-00A0C93EC93B in 
the case of gpt. 
The ESP contains EFI applications such as bootloaders and utility software, stored in directories specific to software 
vendors. 
for ex in  Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6.9 file system, the ESP is /boot/efi/, and EFI software provided by Red Hat is 
stored in /boot/efi/EFI/redhat/.
The /boot/efi/EFI/redhat/ directory contains grub.efi, a version of GRUB compiled for the EFI firmware architecture as 
an EFI application. 
In the simplest case, the EFI boot manager selects grub.efi as the default bootloader and reads it into memory.
If the ESP contains other EFI applications, the EFI boot manager might prompt you to select an application to run, 
rather than load grub.efi automatically.
GRUB determines which operating system or kernel to start, loads it into memory, and transfers control of the machine 
to that operating system.
Because each vendor maintains its own directory of applications in the ESP, chain loading is not normally necessary on 
UEFI-based systems. The EFI boot manager can load any of the operating system bootloaders that are present in the ESP.


Services
-----------
EFI defines two types of services: boot services and runtime services. Boot services are available only while the 
firmware owns the platform  (i.e., before the ExitBootServices() call), and they include text and graphical consoles on
various devices, and bus, block and file services. Runtime services are still accessible while the operating system is running; 
they include services such as date, time and NVRAM access.

* Graphics Output Protocol (GOP) services
The Graphics Output Protocol (GOP) provides runtime services. The operating system is permitted to directly write to 
the framebuffer provided by GOP during runtime mode.
* UEFI Memory map services
* SMM services
* ACPI services
* SMBIOS services
* Device tree services (for RISC processors)
* Variable services
UEFI variables provide a way to store data, in particular non-volatile data. Some UEFI variables are shared between 
platform firmware and operating systems. Variable namespaces are identified by GUIDs, and variables are key/value 
pairs. For example, UEFI variables can be used to keep crash messages in NVRAM after a crash for the operating system 
to retrieve after a reboot.[46]
* Time services
UEFI provides time services. Time services include support for time zone and daylight saving fields, which allow the 
hardware real-time clock to be set to local time or UTC.[47] On machines using a PC-AT real-time clock, by default the 
hardware clock still has to be set to local time for compatibility with BIOS-based Windows,[6] unless using recent 
versions and an entry in the Windows registry is set to indicate the use of UTC.


Applications
------------
Interaction between the EFI boot manager and EFI drivers

Beyond loading an OS, UEFI can run UEFI applications, which reside as files on the EFI System Partition. They can be 
executed from the UEFI Shell, by the firmware's boot manager, or by other UEFI applications. UEFI applications can be 
developed and installed independently of the original equipment manufacturers.

A type of UEFI application is an OS boot loader such as GRUB, rEFInd, Gummiboot, and Windows Boot Manager; which loads 
some OS files into memory and executes them. Also, an OS boot loader can provide a user interface to allow the 
selection of another UEFI application to run. Utilities like the UEFI Shell are also UEFI applications.
-------------------------------------------------------------

Legacy BIOS and OS loading
-------------------------------

CPU fetches and executes instructions from memory, it was BIOS that loaded our 512-byte boot sector into memory and 
then, having finished its initialisations, told the CPU to jump to the start of our code, whereupon it began executing our 
first instruction, then the next, then the next, etc.
So our boot sector code is somewhere in memory; but where? We can imagine the main memory as long sequence of bytes 
that can individually be accessed by an address (i.e. an index), so if we want to find out what is in the 54th byte of 
memory, then 54 is our address, which is often more convenient to express in hexadecimal: 0x36.

So the start of our boot-sector code, the very first machine code byte, is at some address in memory, and it was BIOS 
that put us there. We might assume, unless we knew otherwise, that BIOS loaded our code at the start of memory, at address 0x0. 
It’s not so straightforward, though, because we know that BIOS has already being doing initialisation work on the 
computer long before it loaded our code, and will actually continue to service hardware interrupts for the clock, disk drives, 
and so on. So these BIOS routines (e.g. ISRs, services for screen printing, etc.) themselves must be stored somewhere in memory 
and must be preserved (i.e. not overwritten) whilst they are still of use. 
Also, we noted earlier that the interrupt vector is located at the start of memory, and were BIOS to load us there, our 
code would stomp over the table, and upon the next interrupt occurring, the computer will likely crash and reboot: the mapping 
between interrupt number and ISR would effectively have been severed.
As it turns out, BIOS likes always to load the boot sector to the address 0x7c00, where it is sure will not be occupied 
by important routines.

Note:
IVR -- Interrupt vector table used bios in Real mode to find ISR (interrupt service routines). 
These are predefined or programmable using some programmable logic device

IDT --> Interrupt descriptor table filled by OS, by specifiying the base address in IDTR (interrupt descriptor table 
register). 
These contain the mapping between interrupt and isrs.

Interrupts can raised by hardware or software. 
A hardware interrupt is usually a dedicated electrical signal to which a special "response circuitry" is attached. This 
circuitry notices an activation of the interrupt and makes the CPU stop its current execution, save its state, and jump to a 
predefined address where a handler routine for the interrupt is located. When the handler finishes its work, the CPU resumes 
execution from where it stopped.

Software interrupts are similar in principle but a bit different in practice. CPUs support special instructions that 
allow the software to simulate an interrupt. When such an instruction is executed, the CPU treats it like an interrupt - stops 
its normal flow of execution, saves its state and jumps to a handler routine. Such "traps" allow many of the wonders of modern OSes 
(task scheduling, virtual memory, memory protection, debugging) to be implemented efficiently.

