1. Repeater – A repeater operates at the physical layer. Its job is to regenerate the signal over the same network
before the signal becomes too weak or corrupted to extend the length to which the signal can be transmitted over 
the same network. An important point to be noted about repeaters is that they not only amplify the signal but 
also regenerate it. When the signal becomes weak, they copy it bit by bit and regenerate it

2. Hub –  A hub is a basically multi-port repeater. They operate at the physical layer of the OSI model. 
It is a network hardware device for connecting multiple Ethernet devices together and making them act as 
a single network segment. It has multiple input/output (I/O) ports, in which a signal introduced at the 
input of any port appears at the output of every port except the original incoming. This means collisions can 
occur when two devices transmit data simultaneously. In networking terminology they are part of the same collision 
domain. This can lead to loss of data and network inefficiencies. Since signal is broadcast to all ports, 
(in networking terminology they share the same broadcast domain) the available bandwidth is shared among 
all the devices. This sharing can lead to network congestion and reduced network performance. Hubs are rarely used 
today in modern networks because they do not offer any intelligence to manage traffic or optimize performance.

3. Bridge - A bridge is a networking device that operates at the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model. 
A bridge reduces collision domain by effectively segmenting the network so that traffic is isolated within 
each connected segment. It does this by learning which devices (specifically, their MAC addresses) are connected 
to each of its ports by examining the source MAC addresses of incoming frames.Once the bridge has learned which 
MAC addresses are reachable through each of its ports, it creates virtual segments (or collision domains) for each device. 
This means that traffic between two devices connected to the same bridge but on different ports doesn't have to be shared 
with all devices on the network; it stays within the same segment.When a frame arrives at a bridge, it examines the 
destination MAC address. If the destination is on the same segment (port) where the frame arrived, the bridge does not 
forward the frame to other segments; it stays within that segment. If the destination is on a different segment, 
the bridge forwards the frame only to that specific segment, not to all segments like a hub would.
Thus by creating separate segments for each port (and hence for each connected device), a bridge effectively reduces the 
size of collision domains. Collisions are limited to devices connected to the same segment, rather than being possible across
all devices on a single network segment.But bridges do not seperate broadcast domains. they typically forward broadcast traffic 
to all segments they connect. These days bridges are considered outdated technology that was used primarily for connecting 
LAN segments and their functionality has largely been integrated into modern network switches.

4. Switch - A switch is a networking device that operates at the data link layer (Layer 2) of the OSI model. 
(Although some operate at layer-3) Its primary function is to connect multiple devices in a local area network (LAN) or 
between LANs (inter-lan if the switch supports layer-3 and has necessary routing configuration) and intelligently forward 
data packets between them. Switches are similar to bridges in that they perform MAC address learning by building a table 
that associates MAC addresses with specific ports. But it has more advanced technology, faster processing speeds, 
faster data transmission rates and offer higher density of ports. Switches support full-duplex communication, allowing data 
to be sent and received simultaneously on a network connection. This further enhances the network's performance and throughput. 
Switches have the ability to segment a network into more physical segments, resulting in higher overall network bandwidth. 
Switches can isolate broadcast domains using VLANs (Virtual Local Area Networks),which are logical segmentation of a network 
into separate broadcast domains. VLANs allow switches to control and segment broadcast traffic more effectively than traditional 
bridges.Switches allows multiple groups of ports to operate simultaneously. This means that a switch combines 
the functionalities of multiple bridges rather than just acting as a single bridge. Today switches have replaced traditional 
bridges and become the primary networking technology for interconnecting networks.

5. Router - Switches and bridges connect multiple devices to create a network. A Router connects multiple switches and their 
respective networks, to form a larger network. Routers operate at the network layer of the OSI model and connect different networks. 
They direct data packets between networks, making decisions based on IP addresses. Routers play a crucial role in determining the most 
efficient path for data to travel between devices on different subnets.

6. Gateway: Gateways serve as protocol converters, facilitating communication between networks with different 
communication protocols. They play a crucial role in ensuring interoperability in heterogeneous network environments.
Additionally, gateways often act as security checkpoints, implementing firewalls and other security measures.

7. NAT - Network Address Translation. It's a way to map multiple private addresses inside a local network to a 
public IP address before transferring the information onto the internet. An external address, usually routable, 
is the "outside" of the NAT. The machines behind the NAT have an "inside" address that is usually non-routable. 
When a connection is made between an inside address and an outside address, NAT device replaces the source private ip address/port
with its own public address and a "unique port number" (to differentiate b/w multiple outbound requests from the same i/p).
The NAT system in the middle creates a forwarding table entry consisting of (outside_ip, outside_port, nat_host_ip, 
nat_host_port, inside_ip, inside_port). Any packet matching the first four parts gets its destination re-written to the last two parts.
If a packet is received that doesn't match an entry in the NAT table, then there is no way for the NAT box to
know where to forward it unless a forwarding rule was manually defined. That's why, by default, a machine behind a NAT device 
is "protected". Your home router performs NAT.. The system has an internal address, and our ISP provides us an external IP to 
which it is mapped by the router. 

----------------------------------------------

Routing
=====================

Before we get into routing, it helps to understand a little bit about how packets find their way to the correct host on a network.
The TCP/IP network model defines a five layer stack that describes the mechanisms necessary to move data packets from one host to another,
whether that host is on the local network or halfway around the world. Each of the layers in the following description of this
model is numbered and also contain the names of the data units that are handled by that layer.

5. Application layer: 
Message This layer consists of the connection protocols required for various network applications to communicate, 
such as HTTP, DHCP, SSH, FTP, SMTP, IMAP, and others. When you request a web page from a remote web site, 
a connection request is sent to the web server and the response is sent back to your host at this layer and
then your browser displays the web page in its window.

4. Transport layer: 
TCP segment. The transport layer provides end-to-end data transport and flow management services that are 
independent of the data and types of protocols being transported. It uses ports such as 80 for HTTP and 25 
for SMTP to make connections between the sending host and the remote host.

3. Internet layer: 
Packet. Packet routing is performed on the Internet layer. This layer is responsible for routing packets
across two or more different networks in order to reach their final destination. This layer uses IP Addresses
and the routing table to determine which device to send the packets to next. If sent to a router, each router
is responsible for sending the data packets only to the next router in the series and not for mapping out the
entire route from the local host to the target host. The Internet layer is mostly about routers talking to routers 
in order to determine the next router in the chain.

2. Data Link layer: 
Frame. The Link layer manages the direct connections between hardware hosts on a single, local, logical, 
physical network. This layer uses the Media Access Control (MAC) addresses embedded in the Network Interface Cards (NICs) 
to identify the physical devices attached to the local network. This layer cannot access hosts that are not on the local network.

1. Physical layer: 
Bits. This is the hardware layer and consists of the NICs and the physical Ethernet cable as well as the 
hardware level protocols used to transmit individual bits that make up the data frames between any two hosts
or other network nodes that are locally connected.


A simple example

So what does that look like when a host is actually sending data on the network using the TCP/IP network model? 
Here is my own made-up description of how data are moved from one network to another. 
In this example, my computer is sending a request to a remote server for a web page.

1. On the application layer, the browser initiates an HTTP connection request message to the remote host, www.example.com, 
to send back the data comprising the contents of a web page. This is the message, and it includes only the IP Address of the remote web server.

2. The transport layer encapsulates the message containing the web page request in a TCP datagram with the IP address 
of the remote web server as the destination. Along with the original request packet, this packet now includes the 
source port from which the request will originate, usually a very high number random port, so that the return data 
knows which port the browser is listening on; and the destination port on the remote host, port 80 in this case.

3. The Internet layer encapsulates the TCP datagram in a packet that also contains both the source and destination IP addresses.

4. The data Link layer uses the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) to identify the physical MAC address of the default router
and encapsulates the Internet packet in a frame that includes both the source and destination MAC addresses.
Note: source could be NIC card and destination is default router. 

5. The frame is sent over the wire, usually CAT5 or CAT6, from the NIC on the local host to the NIC on the default router.

6. The default router opens the datagram and determines the destination IP address. The router uses its own routing table 
to identify the IP address of the next router that will take the frame onto the next step of its journey. 
The router then re-encapsulates the frame in a new datagram that contains its own MAC as the source and the MAC address 
of the next router and then sends it on through the appropriate interface. 
The router performs its routing task at layer 3, the Internet layer.

Note that switches are invisible to all protocols at layers two and above, so they do not affect the transmission of data in any logical manner.
The function of switches is merely to provide a simple means to connect multiple hosts into a single physical network via lengths of Ethernet cable.

You can use the arp [-n] command to view all of the MAC addresses that your host has stored in its arp table. 
These are always hosts on the local network.

The routing table
-------------------
All network devices, whether they are hosts, routers, or other types of network nodes such as network attached printers,
need to make decisions about where to route TCP/IP data packets. The routing table provides the configuration information 
required to make those decisions.A routing table similar to the very simple one in Figure 1 is used to define the single 
route available to a typical local host and to determine whether to send packets to the default gateway router. 

The route -n command lists the routing table; the -n option displays the results as IP addresses only and does not attempt
to perform a DNS lookup which would replace the IP address with hostnames if they are available. 
The netstat -rn command produces very similar results.

[root@host1 ~]# route -n

Destination     Genmask        Gateway        Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface
0.0.0.0         0.0.0.0        192.168.0.254  UG    100    0        0 eno1
192.168.0.0     255.255.255.0  0.0.0.0        U     100    0        0 eno1


Components of Routing Table Entries
-----------------------------------
An entry in a routing table is usually a route to a specific network. The basic components of each entry in the routing table are:

Destination address: this refers to the IP address of the destination network.

Subnet mask/Netmask: This column and Destination together describe the Network identifier. For ex, destination 192.168.0.0 and 
netmask 255.255.255.0 can be written as 192.168.0.0/24.

Gateway/Next Hop: This is the address of the next station to which the packet is to be sent on the way to its final destination

Interface: this refers to the local outgoing interface that is used to reach the gateway. 

Metric: this assigns a value to each route to ensure that optimal routes are chosen for sending packets. 
In some instances, the metric is the number of hops or number of routers to be crossed to get to the destination network. 
If multiple routes exist, the route with the lowest metric is usually chosen.

for ex:

Network	destination	Netmask			Gateway		Interface	Metric
0.0.0.0			0.0.0.0			192.168.0.1	192.168.0.100	10
127.0.0.0		255.0.0.0		127.0.0.1	127.0.0.1	1
192.168.0.0		255.255.255.0		192.168.0.100	192.168.0.100	10

Each entry is usually a route to a specific network. 

The first entry is the default route. It is identified by all zeros in both Destination and subnet mask. 
It is used when a more specific route does not exist. It also indicates that the gateway 102.168.0.1 can be reached 
through a NIC card with address 192.168.0.100. The metric indicates the associated cost. 

Routing decisions
------------------
They are fairly simple for most hosts:

    If the destination host is on the local network, send the data directly to the destination host.
    If the destination host is on a remote network that is reachable via a local gateway listed in the routing table, send it to the explicitly defined gateway.
    If the destination host is on a remote network, and there is no other entry that defines a route to that host, send the data to the default gateway.

These rules simply mean that if all else fails because there is no match, send the packet to the default gateway.

Let's see a routing example: Let's say PC1 would like to send a packet to PC3. 

[PC1] -------------- [router : eth0] ------------------ [PC3]
10.0.0.4		RouterA				101.25.67.7

PC3 is not on PC1's network. So PC1 forwards this packet to RouterA, Upon arrival at
RouterA, the router checks its routing table for  path to destination 101.25.67.0

Suppose we have the following routing table entries

Network-Destination	Netmask		Gateway		Interface	Metric

101.15.67.0		255.255.255.0	10.0.0.2	eth3		1

0.0.0.0			0.0.0.0		10.0.0.1	eth0		0

192.25.67.0		255.255.255.0	10.0.0.3	eth5		10

Since a path exists (first entry), the packet will be forwarded to the gateay 10.0.0.2 through interface eth3 on RouterA.

Now let's consider the second entry. Suppose the user of PC1 wants to send a packet to PC25 on the network 200.0.2.0. 
RouterA will check its routing table for an entry to the address on which PC25 is located. As there is no recorded entry, 
it forwards this packet to the default gateway at 10.0.0.1 through interface eth0. 
The default gateway is always present in any routing table. t’s used when there is no entry for a specific network on the routing table. 
The default gateway usually connects to other remote networks. For example, in a home environment, the default gateway is connected to the Internet.

In the third and final entry, just like the first entry, a packet addressed to destination 192.25.67.0 will be forwarded to 
the gateway at 10.0.0.3 through interface eth5.

Routing configuration
----------------------
So how does the routing table get configured? For hosts connected to the network using DHCP, the DHCP server provides that configuration 
information for the default route along with DNS, the hosts IP address, and possibly other information such as the IP address for 
an NTP server. For static configurations, it is usually simple, but it can be a bit more complicated sometimes.
